Uh.
NOTE CONF
Uh, something's gone wrong with my, uh, with the sound
on this thing.
NOTE CONF
I can't play music.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Next time.
I don't know.
NOTE CONF
I don't know what it is.
Everything looks like it's, uh.
NOTE CONF
It should work.
Hmm.
NOTE CONF
Oh, well.
Just have to put up with my lecture without music.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let me get started.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Please sit down and I'll get started.
NOTE CONF
I've got a lot to get through today.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So today I'm going to be talking about data representation
and possibly getting onto data abstraction.
NOTE CONF
I'm not sure if I'll make it that far.
Um, so this week you've got, um, you've got one
NOTE CONF
C and L, uh, computation and logic lecture on Thursday
with Julian and three functional programming lectures.
NOTE CONF
So today and tomorrow from me.
And on Friday we have a, a special guest coming
NOTE CONF
to give a lecture.
Um, his name is John Hughes.
NOTE CONF
He's from Chalmers University in Sweden, and he's one of
the original developers of Haskell and co-inventor of QuickCheck.
NOTE CONF
He's a he's a very good speaker, even better than
me.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, uh, and he's going to be talking to
you about QuickCheck and how he's using it with people
NOTE CONF
in industry to find bugs in their C programs.
So it's branched out beyond Haskell, uh, to other languages
NOTE CONF
as well.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, yeah, he's a good speaker.
It'll be fun.
NOTE CONF
It'll be interesting.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And, uh.
Come.
NOTE CONF
Please come.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's Friday in the usual slot.
Okay, so today it's, uh, data representation.
NOTE CONF
And what I did last time was talk about, well,
I talked about rates of growth of, uh, of of
NOTE CONF
functions used to measure efficiency of programs and how, um,
you know, if you have something that's linear, it's better
NOTE CONF
than if it's quadratic, and that's better than if it's
cubic, and if it's logarithmic in the size of the
NOTE CONF
data, that's even better.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, and I use that.
So this was, this was talking about the way that
NOTE CONF
we measure, uh, time, the time that programs take is
we're worried about the, the shape of the, of the
NOTE CONF
runtime, uh, so-called asymptotic, uh, uh, time.
So the, the way that, that, that the time grows
NOTE CONF
as a function of the input size and, and ignoring
constant factors, just looking at the shape, whether it's a
NOTE CONF
straight line or logarithmic or whatever.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, and I, and I, uh, I explained that
because I wanted to talk about different representations of data
NOTE CONF
and how you can have different representations with different, um,
efficiencies.
NOTE CONF
Cece and, um.
And I'm.
NOTE CONF
And I'm, uh, showing that to you by showing you
four different representations of sets.
NOTE CONF
And the first one that I showed you was sets
as lists.
NOTE CONF
And I showed you some code and, um, all of
the implementations of sets that I'm going to show you
NOTE CONF
how the same six things are implemented.
So the, the, the type of sets are the constant,
NOTE CONF
the empty set and insert function, a function for turning
lists into sets, a membership function called element and equality
NOTE CONF
testing on sets.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, and I gave implementations of these things for
the simple case of representing sets as ordinary lists.
NOTE CONF
And we're talking about sets of we'll be talking about
sets of integers just to keep things simple.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, although this is polymorphic, so it works for any
NOTE CONF
sets.
Um, anyway, um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we went through the code for that, and, um,
the next one I want to get on to is
NOTE CONF
um, is representing sets as ordered lists.
And this was, um, motivated by the fact that testing
NOTE CONF
equality for sets as, as lists that are not ordered.
When I say ordered, I mean the elements are in
NOTE CONF
ascending order.
So smallest ones, smallest ones at the beginning going up
NOTE CONF
to the biggest ones at the end.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Ordered by the, the the the the values that are
in there okay.
NOTE CONF
If they're numbers then you've got the small numbers here
the big numbers here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um, and I explained that equality testing on on
NOTE CONF
sets represented as ordinary lists is quadratic because the code.
Well, I mean the code was here.
NOTE CONF
And um, that code it in order to check whether
two sets represented as lists are the same, you have
NOTE CONF
to check whether all the elements in one are in
the other, and all the elements in the other one
NOTE CONF
are in the first one.
Okay, so two subset operations.
NOTE CONF
Each of those is quadratic okay.
So testing equality on of of sets representative list is
NOTE CONF
quadratic.
And um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this motivated the idea that if we could represent
NOTE CONF
um sets as ordered lists.
And here I come to this thing here.
NOTE CONF
So um, here here is why we have to, why
we have to do complicated equality testing.
NOTE CONF
Because if we do, um, insertion of elements into a,
into a set, represented as a list, we get different,
NOTE CONF
different lists which are representations of the same set.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are three representations of a set that contains
the values one and two.
NOTE CONF
But they're in different they're in different orders okay.
And so equality testing is complicated.
NOTE CONF
If we could arrange that they end up.
In order and without duplicates, then no matter how many
NOTE CONF
times we insert numbers into values, into a list, in
what order or whatever, we end up with the same.
NOTE CONF
The same underlying list.
Okay, it's an order without duplicates.
NOTE CONF
And so equality testing on these kinds of things is,
is is easy compared with with these.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is the motivation or one motivation for uh,
NOTE CONF
doing representation of sets as ordered lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to quickly go through the code.
You know we know that equality testing is going to
NOTE CONF
be faster.
But what about the other stuff?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to quickly go through the code.
NOTE CONF
And um, I've got a lot of to get through
this in this lecture, and the emphasis here is not
NOTE CONF
on how wonderful my code is or anything like that.
The emphasis is on the the kind of ideas, um,
NOTE CONF
that I'm trying to get across.
So different representations of sets, ordered lists versus unordered lists
NOTE CONF
and and so forth.
The code is relatively routine for how to how to
NOTE CONF
implement those things.
So I'm going to be whizzing through it at a
NOTE CONF
relatively quick speed.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you want to look at the details, you
can download the code and you can play with it
NOTE CONF
and you can look at it and, um, and so
forth.
NOTE CONF
But I'll try to give you a, well, I'll try
to go slow enough that it's, uh, that it's possible
NOTE CONF
to understand what I'm talking about at least.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I want to represent, uh, uh, sets as
ordered lists, okay.
NOTE CONF
Same, same six things that I'm going to have in
this, uh, in this module.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
As before, um, I, uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So sets are still represented as lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Set A is equal to a list of a.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I have now, uh, something I'm calling an invariant.
NOTE CONF
And this is a this is a function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, what is it?
An invariant of a data representation.
NOTE CONF
Is, um, is something that characterises the values that I'm
going to be using in the data representation to represent
NOTE CONF
the things that I want to represent.
So, um, what I mean by that is I'm representing
NOTE CONF
sets as ordered lists.
And so I want to specify that the lists have
NOTE CONF
to be ordered.
If the list if a list is not ordered then
NOTE CONF
I'm not interested in it.
I'm only interested in the ordered ones.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um, that's expressed by this function which tests the
NOTE CONF
set and and returns true if it's ordered.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
That's expressed in Haskell like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We go we go through and look at adjacent pairs
NOTE CONF
and check to see that the, the first one is
smaller than the second one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This says that the list is ordered.
NOTE CONF
And the fact that I'm using here, um, less than
and not less than or equal to means that not
NOTE CONF
only is it ordered, but there are no duplicates.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's no cases where, um, adjacent elements are equal.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a, this is expressing in Haskell this
invariant, this property that I'm talking about ordered lists without
NOTE CONF
repetitions.
And I've written this in Haskell, but it's um, it's
NOTE CONF
not going to be executed unless I want to test,
um, uh, values to see if they're, if they're, if
NOTE CONF
they're in this invariant or not.
Um, but it's convenient to write it down in this
NOTE CONF
notation, since we have it handy here.
Um, by the way, uh, you might be wondering what
NOTE CONF
this is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You'll be seeing these.
These are these are type qualifications.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, this type says that it's a function from
set of a to bool.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but in order to use it, you need a
type A, which is an ordered type.
NOTE CONF
Ordered type means it's a type that I can use
less than and greater than and less than or equal
NOTE CONF
to and so forth on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So not all types have that property.
So it's a kind of proviso, um, that it has
NOTE CONF
to have that it has to be an order type.
We saw that actually a little, a little bit before
NOTE CONF
um, membership.
This is on ordinary um, uh, sets as ordinary lists.
NOTE CONF
So membership has this type.
It takes an element and a set and tells you
NOTE CONF
whether that elements in the set.
But it only works If the elements in the set
NOTE CONF
are elements that you can do, that type you can
do equality testing on.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So these are type qualifications.
NOTE CONF
And I'll be talking about them in I think next
week.
NOTE CONF
It's uh there's this a general uh, feature of, of
Haskell called type classes.
NOTE CONF
And these are examples of type classes.
But I'll, I'll just for now say that's what's going
NOTE CONF
on here and I'll explain it properly next week.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So for now, just, uh, understand that that's, uh, those
are sort of provisos on when you're allowed to apply
NOTE CONF
these, these functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're interested in things like like integers which are,
which have this order relation on them here.
NOTE CONF
Um, by the way, order implies that you have equality.
Because if you can if you can test whether whether
NOTE CONF
this is less than this and also whether this is
less than this, then that means that they're equal.
NOTE CONF
I mean, if both of those tests are true.
Okay, so we've got sets, we've got this invariant.
NOTE CONF
And now we can write code for the various, um,
the various things that I want here.
NOTE CONF
So empty set is still the empty list, the insert
function.
NOTE CONF
It has to give me, um, ordered lists.
So it has to given, uh, an element and an
NOTE CONF
ordered lists.
You want to put the new element into the into
NOTE CONF
the list.
Okay, here's the element.
NOTE CONF
Here's the list.
You want to put the element in the right place
NOTE CONF
in this list so that you maintain the order.
You can't just bung it in the front the way
NOTE CONF
we did with unordered lists, because it might not be
the right place.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this code looks for the right place and uh,
NOTE CONF
uh, gives you back the list together with that new
element.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the right place we've got three cases here, I
NOTE CONF
won't.
Well, I'll just, uh.
NOTE CONF
You know, you go recursively down the list and you
look for the place where the new element x here,
NOTE CONF
um, uh, fits, okay.
And it fits in the place where, um, it's less
NOTE CONF
than, uh, the head of the bit of the list.
You take the whole list and you're going one at
NOTE CONF
a time down.
You're looking for the place where the element you're inserting
NOTE CONF
is less than the head of the rest of the
list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Which is what this code is doing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In a situation where x is less than y, you
NOTE CONF
you put it in and you're done.
If it's already there, you don't have to put it
NOTE CONF
in because it's already there.
If it's if it's greater than the element that you're
NOTE CONF
looking at, then you insert it further down the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's what this code does.
It goes down the list, looks for the right place
NOTE CONF
and puts it in in that place.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
So this is take advantage of the, um.
Well, uh, I shouldn't have said that.
NOTE CONF
It's it's, uh, it's, um, uh, it's preserving the invariant
and putting the value into the list in the right
NOTE CONF
place.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The the the function which takes a list and turns
it into a set, it has to, um, if it's
NOTE CONF
just an any old list, it has to, um, put
it into the right order and remove duplicates.
NOTE CONF
And so that's what this code does.
It sorts the list and it removes duplicates.
NOTE CONF
So sort is a built in function in Haskell.
It's in well it's in data dot Lisp library.
NOTE CONF
And um nub is a function which removes duplicates.
So so that's what this code is here.
NOTE CONF
Um, another way to do that, by the way, would
be to start with the empty list and insert.
NOTE CONF
Use this insert function repeatedly, um, with a fold or
something to to insert each element in the right place
NOTE CONF
in the list, and then you end up with an
ordered list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, now membership and equality.
So the important thing is, is equality.
NOTE CONF
Equality is really easy.
As I said, because of this property that the lists
NOTE CONF
are ordered okay.
If the lists are ordered and they have no duplicates,
NOTE CONF
then two lists represent the same set.
If they're the same list, okay, there's no other way
NOTE CONF
for them to have the same elements in them then
for them to be equal as lists and so and
NOTE CONF
so.
Testing equality on sets, um, is exactly testing equality on
NOTE CONF
the lists that represent those sets if they're ordered without
duplicates.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and membership can also take advantage of the order.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you've got a list here and it's an
NOTE CONF
order and you've got an element you want to check
to see if it's in the list.
NOTE CONF
You start at the beginning and you go down looking
for the for the element to see if it's there.
NOTE CONF
And at a certain point maybe you find it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Or if you find an element which is bigger than
the element you're looking for, you know that that element
NOTE CONF
that you're looking for can't be there.
Because if it was there, you would have found it
NOTE CONF
already.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you can stop.
And so that's what these these cases are okay.
NOTE CONF
If I, if I'm if I'm going this is with
recursion of course.
NOTE CONF
As usual.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're going down the list okay.
If the element I'm looking for.
NOTE CONF
Okay x is the element I'm looking for.
If the element that I'm at currently y is greater
NOTE CONF
than x, it means that I've.
I've gone past the place where x would be if
NOTE CONF
it was there.
And so the answer is false.
NOTE CONF
No, the element isn't in the list Okay, if I
found it, obviously the answer is true.
NOTE CONF
If I haven't yet reached the place where the element
would be because I'm looking at an element that's smaller
NOTE CONF
than x, then I continue recursing.
Okay, so I go down the list until I get
NOTE CONF
to the place where it should be.
It's either there or not, and I and I either
NOTE CONF
find it or I stop.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So how fast are these things?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, with of course, empty set as empty list
is constant time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Inserting an element into a list, uh, for, for unordered
NOTE CONF
lists, it was constant time because it was just cons.
Okay, here we have to do some work.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have to go down the list, look for
the right place to put it and put it in
NOTE CONF
there.
So that's linear time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It has to go down and look at at most
NOTE CONF
uh, each element once.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This function that turns a list into a set.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is, um, uh, I'll just say now and I'll
come.
NOTE CONF
Well, I'll explain it later.
Sorting is, um, n log n time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And nub is actually, uh, n squared time.
NOTE CONF
So this whole thing is going to be n squared
time.
NOTE CONF
I'll talk about sorting.
In my next lecture I think um a little bit
NOTE CONF
more about that okay.
Membership.
NOTE CONF
How fast is membership okay.
So I go down I'm looking for an element.
NOTE CONF
I'm going down the list.
And I might have to go all the way to
NOTE CONF
the end, or I might get to stop somewhere in
the middle if I find the thing or if it's
NOTE CONF
if I find out that it can't be there because
I've already reached an element which is larger than it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so how much time does that take?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Membership Before for unordered lists was linear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, in this case, you might be able to stop
a little bit before you get to the end, but
NOTE CONF
still, in the worst case, it's linear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In the worst case, you have to go all the
way to the end.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In the average case, you have to go about halfway
NOTE CONF
down.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So instead of being instead of taking n steps, that
takes n over two steps.
NOTE CONF
But that's still linear okay.
Linear times a constant is still linear.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's a bit faster, but it's not um, it's not
NOTE CONF
a different, um, uh, complexity class.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this one here is linear because, uh, list list
equality is linear.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's a big improvement because for unordered lists it was
NOTE CONF
um quadratic.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that?
I want to go on to my next, um, my
NOTE CONF
next representation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Those were two representations of sets as lists.
Um, now I want to talk about sets being represented
NOTE CONF
as trees.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Because we can do a lot better if we if
we represent sets as trees.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to have to draw some pictures.
The idea is that with sets as trees, we're going
NOTE CONF
to be able to check membership in logarithmic time rather
than linear time.
NOTE CONF
Let me draw a picture and show you what I
mean.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to be representing sets as trees and they're
NOTE CONF
going to be ordered trees.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What I mean by that let me draw a picture
of a of a tree.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's a tree.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a it's called a labelled binary tree.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Binary.
Because at at each kind of, um, these are, these
NOTE CONF
are called nodes.
All of the things here are called nodes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, it's a, it's a binary tree because at
NOTE CONF
each node where there are branches, there are two branches.
Binary meaning two.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can have other kinds of trees.
NOTE CONF
This is a binary tree.
It's a labelled binary tree, meaning that we have, um,
NOTE CONF
labels at the nodes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Labels meaning values.
So we assign values to the to the nodes.
NOTE CONF
We put we put values in the nodes.
And it's an ordered labelled binary tree because it has
NOTE CONF
a special property that at every node let me just
pick one.
NOTE CONF
Like there that 140.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Everything.
In the left subtree is less than the label okay.
NOTE CONF
Everything here is less than 40.
And everything in the right subtree is greater than that
NOTE CONF
label.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that holds not just for this node.
It holds for every single node in this tree Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now, why is that good?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's good because suppose I'm looking for a value and
I want to see if it's there or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Suppose I'm looking for, um, uh, 33, just to pick
NOTE CONF
a value.
Okay, so I start here.
NOTE CONF
I'm looking for 33.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's not there, okay.
It's bigger than what's here.
NOTE CONF
So I know I have to go in this direction
to find it if it's going to be there at
NOTE CONF
all.
Okay, so I go I'm looking for 33.
NOTE CONF
I go there, okay, I know I have to go
this direction because it can't be on this side.
NOTE CONF
It has to be on this side somewhere if it's
there at all.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I get to 40.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
It can't be.
It can't be over here because these are all bigger
NOTE CONF
than 40 and 33 is smaller than 40.
So I have to go that way.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I get to, um.
NOTE CONF
32.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
It's not there.
NOTE CONF
And it has to be.
It has to be that way.
NOTE CONF
Sorry for my messy diagram.
Um, it has to be that way if it's there
NOTE CONF
at all, because 33 is bigger than 32.
And then I get here.
NOTE CONF
And if there were, if there were further branches down
here, I would know that I have to go this
NOTE CONF
way.
But there aren't.
NOTE CONF
And so I've, I've reached the end and I and
I haven't found it.
NOTE CONF
So it's not there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, the thing that's great about this is that
I've only had to look at, um, uh, one, two,
NOTE CONF
three, four out of the, um, 123456789 1011.
I had to look at four out of 11, um,
NOTE CONF
labels on this tree.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now, this is a small tree, so that might not
seem very exciting.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But in general, um, so the depth of this tree,
NOTE CONF
um, is four okay.
1234.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The depth is four.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so the maximum number of elements in a tree
NOTE CONF
of depth four is, um, two to the four minus
one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
15.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And in general okay.
NOTE CONF
This holds for any n right.
So a tree of depth n can hold two to
NOTE CONF
the n minus one elements.
Set another way the the length of the longest path
NOTE CONF
from from this the root to to the the bottom
of the tree.
NOTE CONF
The leaves is the logarithm of the amount of data
in the tree.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so what I'm saying here is that finding an
NOTE CONF
element, whether it's there or not is logarithmic in the
amount of data.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that's really good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Remember my pictures back here I'll just flick back okay.
NOTE CONF
Logarithm was the one creeping along the bottom.
You can hardly see it okay.
NOTE CONF
Double the amount of data increases the time by one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is the motivation for looking at, uh, trees
for representing sets.
NOTE CONF
Um, specifically um labelled ordered labelled binary trees.
So, so I'm going to show you code for doing
NOTE CONF
that.
Uh, again I mean, these things get increasingly complicated.
NOTE CONF
So making things fast involves sometimes making them more complicated.
That's typical.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so we've got now we're going to implement
the same the same six things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
A set is going to be represented as a tree.
NOTE CONF
And this is our this is an algebraic data type
for trees of the kind that I just described.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, a set is represented as a tree which is
NOTE CONF
either empty.
So that's we'll call that nil or it's a node
NOTE CONF
consisting of um, a left subtree, a label and a
right subtree.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I should leave my picture up here.
Uh, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Again, this messy diagram.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
So a, um, So a tree.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at let's concentrate on this bit.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
A tree is a left subtree a label and a
right subtree.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is defined using recursion as usual okay.
NOTE CONF
And the two and constructors are nil for the empty
tree and node.
NOTE CONF
For a tree that has two subtrees.
And the label okay I'm putting the label in the
NOTE CONF
middle because that's what the picture looks like.
Doesn't doesn't not very significant okay.
NOTE CONF
And then my invariant on these kind of trees is
more complicated than my previous one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What it says is that, uh, given a set represented
NOTE CONF
this way, I want.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Looking looking from the bottom here, these two, these two,
these two lines at the bottom.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's saying that any node in the tree, um, everything
NOTE CONF
in the left subtree should be less than the node
label.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
And everything in the right subtree should be greater than
NOTE CONF
the node label.
That's what this this is doing.
NOTE CONF
This is a this is a list comprehension.
And there's an and apply to it okay.
NOTE CONF
It's looking at all of the values in the left
subtree, checking to see that they're less than the node
NOTE CONF
label.
And that has to be true for all of them
NOTE CONF
okay.
And and and ditto for the for the right subtree
NOTE CONF
has to be greater than the node label.
And so I'm requiring that.
NOTE CONF
And I'm requiring that not just at, at the, at
the sort of root of the tree, the top of
NOTE CONF
the tree are requiring it for every single subtree.
And that's why it's a recursive, uh, recursive function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what this is expressing is that at every node
NOTE CONF
Everything in the left subtree is, um.
Everything in the left subtree is smaller than the node
NOTE CONF
level label.
Everything in the right subtree is greater than the node
NOTE CONF
label, and that holds for every single node in the
tree.
NOTE CONF
This uses um you see here.
List this.
NOTE CONF
This happens to use a helper function here, which takes
a tree and gives you a list of all the
NOTE CONF
values in the tree.
And, um, I'll just, uh, say something about this.
NOTE CONF
This is something that you quite often do in, um,
in, in, in computer science with trees is that you're
NOTE CONF
interested in, in, in it's called traversing the tree, visiting
all the labels.
NOTE CONF
Uh, sorry.
Visiting all the nodes in the tree and doing something.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Traversing.
NOTE CONF
And, um, and this is traversing a tree and writing
down the labels.
NOTE CONF
So list applied to this tree.
If this is T.
NOTE CONF
This is tea.
Then the list of T in this case would give
NOTE CONF
you all of the labels from left to right.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
And they would end up being an order because of
the way that I've written this function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's all the all the labels in this tree.
NOTE CONF
And the reason that they're in order is not because
I cleverly written them down in order.
NOTE CONF
It's because this function traverses.
I mean, if we look at this, if we look
NOTE CONF
at this, this, um, this tree here, it it it,
it traverses the left subtree that gives me ten, 20
NOTE CONF
and 25.
And then the next thing is the is the node
NOTE CONF
label 30.
And then the next thing is the contents of the
NOTE CONF
right subtree which is all this stuff here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if you look at every one of these nodes,
um, the reason why the things end up in that
NOTE CONF
order is, is because of this ordered property of the
tree and the fact that we're putting the the node
NOTE CONF
label in between the contents of the left and right
subtree.
NOTE CONF
This is called an in-order traversal.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Don't need to remember that.
You might you might come across this at some point
NOTE CONF
in later years.
There's there's other kinds of traversals.
NOTE CONF
There's a pre-order traversal, uh, which would be putting the
node label in front of the left and right subtrees.
NOTE CONF
And there's a post order traversal.
Uh, um, and they're used for different sorts of things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, anyway, just mention that in case you hear the
NOTE CONF
terminology someday and want to know what it is.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So given that invariant, this is what we need all
of our trees to obey.
NOTE CONF
Is this invariant that they're in order okay.
An empty set is represented by the empty tree.
NOTE CONF
The insert function has to look for the right place
in the tree to put a new value.
NOTE CONF
So.
So let's go back to my picture.
NOTE CONF
This picture is getting worse, more and more cluttered.
Someday I'm going to have to learn how to draw
NOTE CONF
pictures on blackboards and things.
It's a bit late, but, uh.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, suppose I want to put.
Suppose I want to put in 33 into this tree.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We know it's not there.
NOTE CONF
We've.
I explained that before, but suppose I want to put
NOTE CONF
it in.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, what I do is I go down the
tree and I look at the place where it should
NOTE CONF
be.
So that's visiting this node, this node, this node and
NOTE CONF
this node, okay.
In each case it's bigger than 30.
NOTE CONF
It's smaller than 40.
It's bigger than 32.
NOTE CONF
It's smaller than 35.
So it has to go here.
NOTE CONF
That's the right place to put it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's what this code does.
That code up there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It it it goes down the tree visiting, visiting the
NOTE CONF
nodes, looking for the right place to put it.
And then once it finds the right place.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Actually this is.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
If it finds it, if it finds an empty tree,
meaning that it's gone all the way to the bottom,
NOTE CONF
then it creates a new node with that, with that
label and empty left and right subtrees.
NOTE CONF
If it finds that it's there already, then it doesn't
have to do anything.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise it decides whether to go left or right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So again, this is um, this is going quite quickly
to the right place, logarithmic time and putting it in
NOTE CONF
the right place.
Um, turning a list into a set is, um, uh,
NOTE CONF
repeatedly doing inserts of the elements in the list, starting
with an empty set.
NOTE CONF
You end up with a with a tree that's in
the right order.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Using this, using this code here.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Finding out whether a value is in there.
NOTE CONF
I've already explained how this works.
You know, um, it goes down looking for the right
NOTE CONF
place for the element, and either it's there or it's
not.
NOTE CONF
And that's what this, that this code does.
Um, you know, if you look at looking, looking for
NOTE CONF
X in a tree consisting of a node with a
left subtree, a label Y and a right subtree, either
NOTE CONF
x is the same as y, in which case you
found it, or else x is less than y, in
NOTE CONF
which case you have to look in the left subtree
or x is greater than y, and you have to
NOTE CONF
look in the right subtree.
So at every step we're throwing away about half of
NOTE CONF
the contents of the tree, okay?
Because, for example, if x is less than Y, we're
NOTE CONF
looking at the left subtree, the right subtree.
We don't care what's there because it's not going to
NOTE CONF
be.
That's not where where my element is going to be.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And likewise here okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is the the the reason why I mean
this is this is logarithmic time.
NOTE CONF
You're you're throwing away massive amount of data at every
step and concentrating on what you need.
NOTE CONF
And then finally, um, equality, uh, set equality.
Um, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Set equality.
We do traversals, these sort of, uh, in order traversals
NOTE CONF
of both of the, um, of both of the trees
and then compare those for equality, because as you've seen,
NOTE CONF
the, uh, the traversal gives us, it's always going to
give us a list in order like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if we do that for true for Two Trees,
NOTE CONF
I'm going to get the same list and I can
just check whether they're equal.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, what about efficiency?
How much time does this take?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, you know, empty is always going to be constant.
NOTE CONF
Uh, insertion.
I've explained that it's logarithmic.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because you, um, you're just taking a path from the
NOTE CONF
root down to a leaf and then inserting the element
there.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
You find the right place and you insert it.
NOTE CONF
It's a path.
Um, if you've got a tree that holds at most
NOTE CONF
if the depth is, is n or sorry, let's call
the depth of D, okay.
NOTE CONF
You've got a tree of of depth D.
It can hold two to the d minus n elements.
NOTE CONF
That is to say the path the length of the
longest path.
NOTE CONF
Well, the length of an of a of an average
path is.
NOTE CONF
Is is the logarithm of the amount of data in
the tree okay.
NOTE CONF
And so insertion is logarithmic.
Um, turning a list into a tree is um n
NOTE CONF
log n still.
Why is that actually okay?
NOTE CONF
Because we're doing insertion n times and uh, insertion is
logarithmic okay.
NOTE CONF
That's where the n log n comes from.
Membership is logarithmic.
NOTE CONF
We've explained I've explained that that was my starting point
okay.
NOTE CONF
This is logarithmic.
It only has to go down one path through this
NOTE CONF
tree.
And equality is um.
NOTE CONF
Linear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Why is that?
Because converting a tree to a list is linear.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Converting this other tree to a list is linear.
NOTE CONF
And checking equality of two lists is linear.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's because everything is in ascending order.
Now any questions at this point?
NOTE CONF
No.
I'm not going to be talking about sets balanced trees.
NOTE CONF
And why is that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um what do I mean by balanced tree?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We've got a problem.
I mean, I explain this, it's all wonderful.
NOTE CONF
You know, uh, everything's working.
Working great.
NOTE CONF
It's all fast.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Problem is.
Um, trees comes in, come in different shapes.
NOTE CONF
So we've just seen.
Seen a tree on my on my messy picture.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, I've just mentioned the word balanced.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Balanced means more or less the same amount of stuff
NOTE CONF
on the left side is on the right side for
every node.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is this is, um, roughly balanced.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But I could have the same data in a tree
NOTE CONF
of a different shape.
So that that tree that I just drew, um, looks
NOTE CONF
kind of like this.
The shape is something like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I could have the same amount of data in a
NOTE CONF
tree that looks like this.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, or or like, you know, or some other shape.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I don't know, I don't know if I've got exactly
NOTE CONF
the same number of nodes here, but I think I
probably need to add some more.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyway, um, the special thing about this kind of
tree is that you've packed quite a lot of data
NOTE CONF
in for a depth that's, um, one, two, three, four.
Okay, here.
NOTE CONF
You've packed.
I haven't counted, so these may not be exactly the
NOTE CONF
same amount of data, but roughly the same amount of
data.
NOTE CONF
And the depth here is, you know, 12345678.
And here it's about the same.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can you can pack the same amount of
NOTE CONF
data into trees of different shapes.
And sometimes you end up with, with rather shallow trees
NOTE CONF
and sometimes you end up with very deep trees.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, the the algorithms that I've just shown you
work.
NOTE CONF
They're fast on these balanced trees and on unbalanced trees,
especially extremely unbalanced trees like these ones.
NOTE CONF
There are no better than, um, ordered lists.
Okay, so by changing from ordered lists to ordered binary
NOTE CONF
trees, we haven't saved anything.
At least not in the worst case.
NOTE CONF
The worst case is when you end up with trees
that look like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, so this is the motivation for looking
at balanced trees.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's my next.
NOTE CONF
My next and last, um, choice of representation okay.
And this is a kind of a cool data structure.
NOTE CONF
It's the first kind of really clever data structure that
you will have seen here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and what it is, it's, it's a, it's a
way of working with, um, ordered trees, um, such that
NOTE CONF
insertion.
So, so that they're always balanced, okay.
NOTE CONF
They're always balanced.
And, um, insertion is done in a very clever way
NOTE CONF
to ensure that this balanced ness is maintained.
So every time we put elements into a tree, we
NOTE CONF
make sure that it's balanced.
And the clever thing is that can be done very
NOTE CONF
efficiently.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are called, um, AVL trees after the inventors,
uh, the inventors, some, some peoples and Russian, uh, uh,
NOTE CONF
computer scientists in the 1960s called Adelson, Belsky and Landis.
And it's named after them.
NOTE CONF
And, um, uh, so the tricky, the clever and tricky
thing is how do you manage to keep the tree
NOTE CONF
balanced in an efficient way?
Okay, so this is your first example of a clever
NOTE CONF
data structure.
There's lots of clever data structures in computer science.
NOTE CONF
You'll see more examples in later courses.
There's a course in second year called Dumb Algorithms and
NOTE CONF
Data Structures.
And clever data structures is often the source of efficient
NOTE CONF
algorithms.
So I'm talking about a balanced balanced binary tree.
NOTE CONF
So here is a picture of a real balanced binary
tree.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
You can see that it's binary.
NOTE CONF
So every every fork in this tree it has two
branches okay.
NOTE CONF
And it's balanced because the, um, you know, every, every
leaf is at the same distance from the root.
NOTE CONF
So this is a balanced binary tree in real life.
Um, cool picture.
NOTE CONF
Um, in computer science, of course, balanced binary binary trees
are written upside down.
NOTE CONF
So this is a balanced binary tree.
Computer science version okay.
NOTE CONF
Same picture upside down.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
You know what a balanced, a balanced binary tree is
at least, uh, um, from, you know, in the form
NOTE CONF
of a picture.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What what about code?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now, this code is actually very similar to the code
you've already seen here.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, boy.
NOTE CONF
I only have four minutes.
Um, it's very similar.
NOTE CONF
All of the code is the same except for insertion
and the the representation.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so the representation of, uh, of of, uh, sets
of tree is the same as before, except that I'm
NOTE CONF
every node.
I record the depth in order to be able to,
NOTE CONF
um, quickly access it.
Um, the invariant Is almost the same as before.
NOTE CONF
The difference is that, uh, as well as the elements
being in the right order in the tree, there's an
NOTE CONF
additional requirement that at every node, the left and subtrees
have depth, which differs at most by one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why why does it differ?
NOTE CONF
But most by one I said it should be balanced.
They should be equal depth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, the answer is that they can't always be equal
NOTE CONF
depth.
Because if you've got a tree that isn't full, there's
NOTE CONF
always going to be places where the depth is going
to be a little bit, a little bit off.
NOTE CONF
What we're requiring is that it's off by the minimum
amount.
NOTE CONF
So at most one okay, that's what this stuff at
the bottom here is saying we require not only everything's
NOTE CONF
in order, but also that the left and right subtrees,
um, at every point have uh, a difference of depth
NOTE CONF
at most one.
And then the, um.
NOTE CONF
I'll just show you.
So.
NOTE CONF
So, uh.
Right.
NOTE CONF
The code for empty is the same.
The code for set is the same.
NOTE CONF
The code for um, element is the same.
In the code for equals the same.
NOTE CONF
The only code that's different is the code for insertion.
And what the code for insertion does.
NOTE CONF
Is actually just the same as before.
This code is the same as before, except for um,
NOTE CONF
once you found the right place for doing an insertion
and you do the insertion, you follow that by a
NOTE CONF
local rebalance step.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because it might be that inserting something into this tree,
uh, brings it out of balance.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now, the code for that is complicated.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's what it looks like.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But in the form of pictures, you can easily understand
it.
NOTE CONF
Let's see if I have time for this.
I think I do, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The, The idea is that once you've, uh, once you've
NOTE CONF
put something into this tree, which was balanced, in the
worst case, it's out of balance by by one, it
NOTE CONF
could be that the that the balance is not just
not just a difference of one, but a difference of
NOTE CONF
two.
And it turns out that there's two cases where that
NOTE CONF
can happen.
And here's pictures of them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Actually there's four cases because there's symmetric variants of this
NOTE CONF
okay.
The idea is in looking at this picture, suppose that
NOTE CONF
I do the insertion and it and it results in
this bit of the tree being too deeper than this
NOTE CONF
bit of the tree.
Okay, A is too deeper than C.
NOTE CONF
That's what this picture is meant to, to to to
show.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Then I can do a little bit of a, of
NOTE CONF
a adjustment to the tree so that it has the
same stuff in it.
NOTE CONF
So A, B and C are still there, the same
size x and y are still there.
NOTE CONF
X and Y still have the same relationship to A,
B, and C as they did before in the sense
NOTE CONF
of, you know, the stuff that's smaller than X is
to the left, just like it was here.
NOTE CONF
The stuff that's larger than X is, is y B
and C that's here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And now everything is balanced.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you've taken a difference of at most of two
NOTE CONF
here and turn it into a difference of zero.
And similar thing here.
NOTE CONF
This is a slightly more complicated picture.
But again you can take this difference between C and
NOTE CONF
D of two and turn it into a into something
that's some better.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And you only have to do this at one place.
NOTE CONF
It's the place where you've done the insertion.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, what I want to say is the result
NOTE CONF
of this is you end up with, um, I'll say
this in the next lecture, you end up with, uh,
NOTE CONF
the, the, the best case complexity of, of balanced trees
of of of my ordered tree representation.
NOTE CONF
So, um, thank you for your patience.
I'll, I'll finish this lecture tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Okay.